Connectivity Proxy Migrator Readme (#20)
kyma-project/cp-mod-migrator: README.md

# Connectivity Proxy Migrator

## Overview

> This repository contains source code of components which are necessary to perform the migration from the legacy `Connectivity Proxy Kyma component` (currently in version 2.9.3) into new `Kyma Connectivity Proxy module`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This repository contains the source code of components that are necessary to perform the migration from the legacy Kyma Connectivity Proxy component (currently in version 2.9.3) into the new Kyma Connectivity Proxy module.
```

The migration is designed as a three-step process where each step is executed by a separate component.

The migrator components are:

> - **Configuration Migrator** - Go Application to performs the main migration operation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Configuration Migrator** - Go Application that performs the main migration operation 
```

- **Backup** - Bash script that performs the backup of the user configuration
- **Cleaner** - Bash script that performs the cleanup of the old CP Kubernetes objects

They are built as separate Docker images and stored in the Kyma Project artifactory. \

> Docker Images are executed during startup of newly installed Kyma Connectivity Proxy module as init containers included into the Connectivity Proxy Operator Deployment. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Docker images are executed during the startup of the newly installed Kyma Connectivity Proxy module as init containers included in the Connectivity Proxy Operator Deployment. \
```

The migration process is designed to be idempotent and can be repeated without any side effects.

### Configuration Migrator

It performs the following steps:

> 1. Finds default `connectivityproxy CR`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Finds the default ConnectivityProxy custom resource (CR)
```

> 2. Exits with error if the `connectivityproxy CR` doesn't exist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Exits with an error if the ConnectivityProxy CR doesn't exist
```

3. Exits with success if one of the following conditions is true:
    - The Connectivity Proxy 2.9.3 is not installed

>     - The `connectivityproxy CR` exists, and have `connectivityproxy.sap.com/migrated` annotation set (migration was performed already)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The ConnectivityProxy CR exists and has the `connectivityproxy.sap.com/migrated` annotation set (migration was performed already)
```

> 4. Reads the current user configuration from `connectivity-proxy`, and `connectivity-proxy-info` config maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Reads the current user configuration from the `connectivity-proxy` and `connectivity-proxy-info` ConfigMaps
```

> 5. Updates the `connectivityproxy CR` with configuration read from the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Updates the ConnectivityProxy CR with the configuration read from the cluster
```

> 6. Adds `migrator.kyma-project.io/migrated="true"` annotation on the CR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Adds the `migrator.kyma-project.io/migrated="true"` annotation to the CR.
```

The migrator transfers the data in the following way:

> - All fields under the key `connectivity-proxy-config.yml` of the config map `connectivity-proxy` are written under `spec.config` key in the CR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All fields under the key `connectivity-proxy-config.yml` of the `connectivity-proxy` ConfigMap are written under the `spec.config` key in the CR
```

- The keys from the `connectivity-proxy-info` are mapped as follows:
    - `onpremise_proxy_http_port` is written into `spec.config.servers.proxy.http.port`
    - `onpremise_proxy_ldap_port` is written into `spec.config.servers.proxy.rfcandldap.port`
    - `onpremise_socks5_proxy_port` is written into `spec.config.servers.proxy.socks5.port`

> - if tenant mode is shared `spec.secretconfig.integration.connectivityservice.secretname` key is set with `connectivity-proxy-service-key` value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if tenant mode is shared, the `spec.secretconfig.integration.connectivityservice.secretname` key is set with the `connectivity-proxy-service-key` value
```

### Backup

It performs the following steps:

> 1. Checks if `connectivityproxy` CRD is installed on the cluster, and exits with success if it is not the case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Checks if the ConnectivityProxy CR is installed on the cluster and exits with success if it's not
```

> 2. Finds default `connectivityproxy CR`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Finds the default ConnectivityProxy CR
```

> 3. Exits with success if the `connectivityproxy CR` doesn't exist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Exits with success if the ConnectivityProxy CR doesn't exist
```

> 4. Exits with success if the `connectivityproxy CR` `migrator.kyma-project.io/backed-up="true"` annotation (backup was completed already)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Exits with success if the ConnectivityProxy CR has the `migrator.kyma-project.io/backed-up="true"` annotation (backup was completed already)
```

> 5. Creates `connectivity-proxy-backup` namespace if it doesn't exist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Creates the `connectivity-proxy-backup` namespace if it doesn't exist
```

> 6. Copies `connectivity-proxy`, and `connectivity-proxy-info` config maps into `connectivity-proxy-backup` namespace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Copies the `connectivity-proxy` and `connectivity-proxy-info` ConfigMaps into the `connectivity-proxy-backup` namespace
```

> 7. Adds `migrator.kyma-project.io/backed-up="true"` annotation on the CR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Adds the `migrator.kyma-project.io/backed-up="true"` annotation to the CR.
```

### Cleaner

> 1. Checks if `connectivityproxy` CRD is installed on the cluster, and exits with success if it is not the case

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Checks if ConnectivityProxy CR is installed on the cluster and exits with success if it's not
```

> 2. Finds default `connectivityproxy CR`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Finds the default ConnectivityProxy CR
```

> 3. Exits with success if the `connectivityproxy CR` doesn't exist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Exits with success if the ConnectivityProxy CR doesn't exist
```

> 4. Exits with success if the `connectivityproxy CR` `migrator.kyma-project.io/cleaned="true` annotation (cleanup was completed already)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Exits with success if the ConnectivityProxy CR has the `migrator.kyma-project.io/cleaned="true` annotation (cleanup was completed already)
```

> 5. Removes the legacy Connectivity Proxy 2.9.3 Kubernetes objects from the cluster (`deployments`, `statuefulsets`, `services`, `configmaps` etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Removes the legacy Connectivity Proxy 2.9.3 Kubernetes objects from the cluster (Deployments, StatefulSets, Services, ConfigMaps, etc.)
```

> 6. Adds `migrator.kyma-project.io/cleaned="true"` annotation on the CR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Adds the `migrator.kyma-project.io/cleaned="true"` annotation to the CR.
```

## Migration process
### Prerequisites

>   - Kyma Cluster with legacy Connectivity Proxy component installed 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Kyma cluster with the legacy Connectivity Proxy component installed 
```

  - New Connectivity Proxy Kyma module ready to be enabled on Kyma cluster
  - Module configured to include Connectivity Proxy init containers.

### Implementation details

> The migration task will be automatically completed during startup of the `Connectivity Proxy Operator` pod, and implemented with init containers. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The migration task is automatically completed during the startup of the Connectivity Proxy Operator Pod and implemented with init containers. \
```

> This Deployment and the default `ConnectivityProxy custom resource (CR)` will be installed on the Kyma cluster when new `Connectivity Proxy Kyma module` is enabled by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This Deployment and the default ConnectivityProxy CR are installed on the Kyma cluster when the new Kyma Connectivity Proxy module is enabled by the user.
```

> The Connectivity Proxy Operator pod runs Connectivity Proxy Migrator components as init containers in following order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Connectivity Proxy Operator Pod runs the Connectivity Proxy Migrator components as init containers in the following order:
```

> 1. **Configuration Migrator** - Extracts the user configuration from config maps and saves it into `ConnectivityProxy CR`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Configuration Migrator** - Extracts the user configuration from ConfigMaps and saves it in the ConnectivityProxy CR.
```

> 2. **Backup** - Backup of the user configuration into separate namespcace `connectivity-proxy-backup`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Backup** - Backup of the user configuration in the separate `connectivity-proxy-backup` namespace.
```

> 3. **Cleaner** - Deletes previous installation of connectivity proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Cleaner** - Deletes the previous installation of Connectivity Proxy.
```

**Note:**

> > - Correct RBACs object must be installed on the cluster to allow for execution of init containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Correct RBACs object must be installed on the cluster to allow for the execution of init containers.
```

> > - Init containers must be configured to communicate over the network without Istio sidecar. This can be done by using special **UID: 1337** \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Init containers must be configured to communicate over the network without the Istio sidecar. This can be done by using special **UID: 1337** \
```

>

> >   For details see [this file](hack/test-deployment/connectivity-proxy-operator-all.yaml)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>   For details see [this YAML file](hack/test-deployment/connectivity-proxy-operator-all.yaml).
```

> Example part of Deployment that fully implements the migration process with init containers in the correct order is shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example of Deployment that fully implements the migration process with init containers in the correct order is shown below:
```

```yaml
      initContainers:
        - name: init-migrator
          image: europe-docker.pkg.dev/kyma-project/prod/cp-mod-migrator:latest
          imagePullPolicy: Always
          securityContext:
            runAsUser: 1337
        - name: init-backup
          image: europe-docker.pkg.dev/kyma-project/prod/cp-mod-backup:latest
          imagePullPolicy: Always
          securityContext:
            runAsUser: 1337
        - name: init-cleaner
          image: europe-docker.pkg.dev/kyma-project/prod/cp-mod-cleaner:latest
          imagePullPolicy: Always
          securityContext:
            runAsUser: 1337
```

> When completed each migration step is marked with by its own annotation on the `ConnectivityProxy CR` object. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When completed, each migration step is marked with its own annotation on the `ConnectivityProxy CR` object. \
```

> This ensures that it will not be repeated in case of the Pod restart. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures that it is not repeated in case of the Pod restart. \
```

> After successful migration, the Connectivity Proxy Operator pod should remain be in running state and all required Connectivity Proxy module parts should be running on the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After successful migration, the Connectivity Proxy Operator Pod should remain in the running state, and all required Connectivity Proxy module parts should be running on the cluster.
```

### Troubleshooting

> It is expected that the `Connectivity Proxy` service will not be available about a minute during migration process. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is expected that the Connectivity Proxy service will not be available for about a minute during the migration process. \
```

When for any reason the service is not available for a longer time some actions are required to fix the situation. \

> You can try to fix Connectivity Proxy Operator pod or restore the old installation. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can try to fix the Connectivity Proxy Operator Pod or restore the old installation. \
```

If you want to fully restore the previous state use backup of user configuration from the `connectivity-proxy-backup` namespace. \
Please make sure to contact the Kyma team for support and assistance.

### Restoring old installation

> The goal is to restore the previous state of the `Connectivity Proxy` in case of any issues during the migration process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal is to restore the previous state of the Connectivity Proxy in case of any issues during the migration process.
```

> Make sure that the `Connectivity Proxy Operator` pod is running, in such a case disable `Connectivity Proxy` module in Busola or by editing Kyma resource. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check if the Connectivity Proxy Operator Pod is running. In such a case, disable the Connectivity Proxy module using Busola or by editing the Kyma resource. \
```

> Wait some time for uninstallation of the `Connectivity Proxy` module. \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Wait some time for the uninstallation of the Connectivity Proxy module. \
```

> After the `Connectivity Proxy Module` is removed please wait about one hour Kyma Control Plane to restore legacy `Connectivity Proxy` objects on the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the Connectivity Proxy module is uninstalled, wait about one hour for the Kyma Control Plane to restore the legacy Connectivity Proxy objects on the cluster.
```

> ### Fixing operator pod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Fixing operator Pod
```

> When `Connectivity Proxy Operator` pod is in Error or CrashLoopBackOff state, annotate ConnectivityProxy CR to ensure init containers will not run again:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Follow these steps if the Connectivity Proxy Operator Pod is in the `Error` or `CrashLoopBackOff` state: 
1. Annotate the ConnectivityProxy CR to ensure init containers will not run again
```

```bash
kubectl annotate connectivityproxies.connectivityproxy.sap.com connectivity-proxy -n kyma-system connectivityproxy\.sap\.com/migrated=true
kubectl annotate connectivityproxies.connectivityproxy.sap.com connectivity-proxy -n kyma-system connectivityproxy\.sap\.com/backed-up=true
kubectl annotate connectivityproxies.connectivityproxy.sap.com connectivity-proxy -n kyma-system connectivityproxy\.sap\.com/cleaned-up=true
```

> Then reboot the `Connectivity Proxy Operator` pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Reboot the Connectivity Proxy Operator Pod.
```
